restindex
    crumb: Virtual Machine
    format: rest
    page-title: nmag installation instructions using VMware Player
    include: No
    page-description:
      nmag installation instructions using VMware Player
    /description
    build: Yes
/restindex



Installing Nmag using the VMware Player
=======================================


.. contents::



Introduction
------------

VMware_ is a company that provides a software that emulates a virtual
computer. Let's assume for simplicity that we have an existing machine
with MS Windows. This is called the host machine. One needs to install
the vmware software (see `Installing the VMware Player`_) on this host
machine. Once the software is installed, it can be started like any
other application. Once this virtual machine software is running, it
will simulate a PC environment so that one can have a second (virtual)
machine running in that window. The 'virtual' hard drive of that
virtual machine is realised through a (few) big files gathered in a
particular directory on the hard drive of the (Windows) host
machine. It is of course required to provide an operating system for
the virtual machine, which could be, for example, Linux.

One would then have the normal MS Windows Operating system running on
the host machine, and a Linux operating system in the VMware
window. (In fact, the window can be blown up to appear as a
full-screen, by pressing CTRL+ALT+Return, or clicking of the
`maximise` icon of the window.)

The performance penalty of running any software in the virtual machine
(rather than on a real machine of similar specification) is usually
less than 10%. In other words, a simulation that takes 10 minutes in
the virtual machine, is not going to be faster than 9 minutes if run
natively.

The nice thing about having this virtual machine is that one can
continue to use one's email, word processing, web browsing and all
other applications in one's usual operating system (Windows in our
example), and simultaneously have a simulation environment for
micromagnetic simulations (which provides all the necessary pre and
postprocessing tools).

In terms of performance, the host machine should have at least 2 GB of
RAM (the more the better). The virtual machine is set to use 1.5 GB
RAM and 1 processor core. It currently needs about 5GB of disk space
on the host machine.



Installing the VMware Player
----------------------------

VMware_ provides a multitude of different products that allow
different degrees of virtualisation. Some of them are free and some
have to be paid for. We try to point to exactly the right product
here, and to keep things simple although VMWare is frequently changing
the names of their products.


If your host runs **MS Windows** or **Linux**, then you can download
the free `VMware Player <http://www.vmware.com/products/player>`__:

 * click on the ``Download`` button
 
 * click on ``Download now`` button

 * At this stage, VMware_ asks you to provide some information to
   profile their customer base.  Complete the form and click ``Submit``.

 * click on the ``Download now`` button

 * Agree to license agreement by pressing ``Accept``

 * Select the right version to download:

   * If your host runs **MS Windows**, then download the latest version of the VMware Player for Windows

   * If your host runs **Linux**, then chose

     * ``.rpm`` for red-hat based systems, or 

     * ``.tar`` for all other Linux systems

     Note that there are also 64-bit versions if you have a 64 bit CPU
     (such as an Opteron)


 * After having downloaded the file, install it as you install any
   other application for your operating system (i.e. for Windows,
   double click on the executable) and follow the instructions.

If your computer is an **IntelMac**, there is unfortunately no version of
the free VMware Player for your machine. However, if you happen to own
`VMware's Fusion <http://www.vmware.com/download/fusion/>`__ product
(or are happy to pay for it), then install VMware fusion and use this
as (a more powerful) VMware player.

If you computer is a **PowerPC Mac**, then you cannot use the Virtual
Machine method.

At this stage, we have installed the VMware Player. Next, we need to
obtain the 'virtual machine' that we want to execute.


Downloading and starting the Nmag virtual machine
-------------------------------------------------

* Download the zipped Nmag virtual appliance from 
  `this directory <http://nmag.soton.ac.uk/0.2/download/vmware>`__. 

.. comment:
  The appliance is split into two files (to ensure that each file does not exceed the 2GB file size limit that some file systems impose).

* unzip the downloaded files: extract they content into a subdirectory with name ``nmag-0.2``.

* start the VMware Player software 

* Within the VMware Player window, select ``Open`` or ``Browse`` to 

  * locate the directory into which you have unzipped the virtual machine.

  * change into that directory and 
 
  * select the file ending in ``.vmx`` to open (for example ``nmag0-2-Ubuntu64_1.vmx``)

  * and click open.

When you do this the first time, the VMware Player may warn that the machine is already in use. If so, select ``Take ownership``.

It will ask you whether this virtual machine has been *moved* or
*copied*. The right answer is *copied*.

Once you have done this, the virtual machine will boot.

When the kernel boot menu appears (the first line starts "GNU GRUB"), do nothing, or press return.

Wait until the graphical login turns up.


Using the Nmag virtual machine
------------------------------

The Nmag virtual machine is an Ubuntu64Bit 11.10 installation which provides
all the software required to run micromagnetic simulations with Nmag.

After booting, a login screen appears. There is only one user
registered. The username is ``nmag`` and the password is
``nmag``. (The root account has the same password; should you ever
need it.)

At this point, you have a complete environment to start simulations,
and the guided tour in the manual is a good starting point to explore
nmag. 

Click CTRL+ALT+T to get a terminal (a shell window).


You find a link on the Desktop (``show_manual.sh``) which will display a local copy of the manual on your harddrive (select 'Run' after double clicking).

If you want to see the examples that are discussed in the manual
directly, you can go to
``/home/nmag/nmag-0.1/nsim/interface/nmag/manual``. Each subdirectory in
there corresponds to one example. Note that there are sometimes
additional files in the directory that are used for automatic creation
of plots in the manual, and for automatic testing (you may want to
ignore those). There is a shortcut ``manual`` for this directory on the Desktop, and also in the home directory of the nmag user.


First steps
-----------

#. Login as ``nmag``, password ``nmag``.

#. Double click on `show_manual.sh`, then ``run`` to display the Nmag manual.

#. Navigate to example 1 in the guided tour (Example: Demag field in uniformly magnetised sphere).

#. Open a terminal (either through clicking on the terminal icon at the top, roughly in the middle, or by going through Applications->Accessories->Terminal.)

#. change into the directory with the manual examples by typing::

     cd manual

#. change into the directory for the first example::

     cd example1

#. run the simulation that is described in the manual by typing::

     nsim sphere1.py



Using VMware player
-------------------

The help function of the VMware Player provides a useful summary of
how to use it.

Note that you can switch to full-screen mode when pressing
CTRL+ALT+RETURN, and that you return from full-screen mode by either
pressing CTRL+ALT, or moving the mouse to the top of the screen (to
get the VMPlayer menu).




  

  

Frequently Asked Questions
--------------------------

.. contents::
  :local:


How can I exchange data between the virtual machine and the host?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to share data with your host, then 

* go to ``VMWare Player->Preferences->Shared Folders``. 

* select ``Always enabled`` or ``Enabled until next power off or suspend``

* click on the ``vmware`` Folder, and select ``Properties``

* Modify the ``Host path`` by clicking the ``Browse`` button: Choose a
  location which the virtual machine can read and write to, for
  example your Desktop (or a dedicated subfolder somewhere).

  Leave the ``Name`` as ``vmware`` so that the instructions below are easier to understand.

* Click OK to close the window. The Shared folder is now configured:

  On the linux system, there is now a folder ``/mnt/hgfs/vmware`` which shows the content of the ``Desktop`` folder on the host (or whichever folder has been chosen above), and can be used to exchange data.



How can I change the keyboard in the Nmag virtual machine?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Log in, then go to the button on the right top, a menu pop downs. Then
select System Settings. A window should appear in which you can select
the ``Keyboard`` item. Then click on ``Layout Settings`` at the
bottom, then click on the ``+`` (plus) symbol and take it from there.


Can I also use other VMware products with the Nmag Virtual machine?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yes, as far as we know. For example, if you have the VMware Work
station or VMware Server, then these can run the Nmag virtual machine
as well. (It may, in fact, be easier to exchange data between the host
and the virtual machine with these more powerful products.)

Can I use other virtual machine products, such as VirtualBox?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yes, although you will not be able to use the image we provide for
download. This will only work with VMWare. We use VMWare for
historical reasons (it has been around for some time), but we are not
aware of any problems with other virtual machine tools. 

If you go this way, we suggest Ubuntu Linux as the client operating
system as Nmag installs most easily in this.

I know Ubuntu or Debian Linux -- can I modify this system?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of course. Once you become root, you can use ``aptitude``, ``apt-get`` and all
other tools to configure your debian system. This is, after all, a
normal installation (even though it is executed within a virtual
machine).

How can I learn more about Linux or this distribution?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Follow the `Ubuntu <http://www.ubuntu.com/>`__ tutorials.







#Install extra software using:

sudo install gmsh netgen paraview mayavi2 emacs grace gnuplot
python-scipy









	 



.. _VMware : http://www.vmware.com
