restindex
    crumb: Virtual Machine
    format: rest
    page-title: nmag installation instructions using VMware Player
    include: Yes
    page-description:
      nmag installation instructions using VMware Player
    /description
    build: Yes
/restindex



Installing Nmag using the VMware Player
=======================================


.. contents::



Introduction
------------

VMware_ is a company that provides a software that emulates a virtual
computer. Let's assume for simplicity that we have an existing machine
with MS Windows. This is called the host machine. One needs to install
the vmware software (see `Installing the VMware Player`_) on this host
machine. Once the software is installed, it can be started like any
other application. Once this virtual machine software is running, it
will simulate a PC environment so that one can have a second (virtual)
machine running in that window. The 'virtual' hard drive of that
virtual machine is realised through a few big files gathered in a
particular directory on the hard drive of the (Windows) host
machine. It is of course required to provide an operating system for
the virtual machine, which could be, for example, Linux.

One would then have the normal MS Windows Operating system running on
the host machine, and a Linux operating system in the VMware
window. (In fact, the window can be blown up to appear as a
full-screen, by pressing CTRL+ALT+Return, or clicking of the
`maximise` icon of the window.)

The performance penalty of running any software in the virtual machine
(rather than on a real machine of similar specification) is usually
less than 10%. In other words, a simulation that takes 10 minutes in
the virtual machine, is not going to be faster than 9 minutes if run
natively.

The nice thing about having this virtual machine is that one can
continue to use one's email, word processing, web browsing and all
other applications, and simultaneously have a simulation environment
for micromagnetic simulations (which provides all the necessary pre
and postprocessing tools).

In terms of performance, the host machine should have at least 1 GB of
RAM (the more the better). It currently needs about 5GB of disk space
on the host machine.



Installing the VMware Player
----------------------------

VMware_ provides a multitude of different products that allow
different degrees of virtualisation. Some of them are free and some
have to be paid for. We try to point to exactly the right product
here, and to keep things simple.


If your host runs **MS Windows** or **Linux**, then you can download
the free `VMware Player <http://www.vmware.com/products/player>`__:

 * click on the ``Download`` button
 
 * click on ``Download now`` button

 * At this stage, VMware_ asks you to provide some information to
   profile their customer base.  Complete the form and click ``Submit``.

 * click on the ``Download now`` button

 * Agree to license agreement by pressing ``Accept``

 * Select the right version to download:

   * If your host runs **MS Windows**, then download the latest version of the VMware Player for Windows

   * If your host runs **Linux**, then chose

     * ``.rpm`` for red-hat based systems, or 

     * ``.tar`` for all other Linux systems

     Note that there are also 64-bit versions if you have a 64 bit CPU
     (such as an Opteron)


 * After having downloaded the file, install it as you install any
   other application for your operating system (i.e. for Windows,
   double click on the executable) and follow the instructions.

If your computer is an **IntelMac**, there is unfortunately no version of
the free VMware Player for your machine. However, if you happen to own
`VMware's Fusion <http://www.vmware.com/download/fusion/>`__ product
(or are happy to pay for it), then install VMware fusion and use this
as (a more powerful) VMware player.

If you computer is a **PowerPC Mac**, then you cannot use the Virtual
Machine method.


At this stage, we have installed the VMware Player. Next, we need to
obtain the 'virtual machine' that we want to execute.


Downloading and starting the Nmag virtual machine
-------------------------------------------------

* Download the zipped Nmag virtual appliance from `this directory <http://nmag.soton.ac.uk/vmware/0.1>`__. The appliance is split into two files (to ensure that each file does not exceed the 2GB file size limit that some file systems impose).

* unzip the downloaded files. (They inflate their content into a subdirectory with name ``nmag-0.1``).

* start the VMware Player software 

* Within the VMware Player window, select ``Open`` or ``Browse`` to 

  * locate the directory into which you have unzipped the virtual machine.

  * change into that directory and 
 
  * select the file ending in ``.vmx`` to open (for example ``nmag0_1_1.vmx``)

  * and click open.

When you do this the first time, the VMware Player will ask you
whether this virtual machine has been *moved* or *copied*. The right
answer is *copied*.

Once you have done this, the virtual machine will boot.


Using the Nmag virtual machine
------------------------------

The Nmag virtual machine is a Debian Linux installation which provides
all the software required to run micromagnetic simulations with Nmag.

After booting, a login screen appears to ask you to provide the
password for user ``guest``. The login manager has been setup such
that no password has to be entered for this user. 

There is only one user registered. The username is ``guest`` and the
password is ``nmag``, should you ever need it. (The root account has
the same password; should you ever need it.)

The default desktop environment is KDE, and looks fairly similar to Windows.

At this point, you have a complete environment to start simulations,
and the guided tour in the manual is a good starting point to explore
nmag. You find a link on the Desktop which will take you to a local
copy of the manual on your harddrive.

If you want to see the examples that are discussed in the manual
directly, you can go to ``/home/guest/nmag_manual``. Each directory in
there corresponds to one example. Note that there are sometimes
additional files in the directory that are used for automatic creation
of plots in the manual, and for automatic testing (you may want to
ignore those).

We understand that it may be a daunting task to start working with a
Linux environment if you had no previous exposure. We aim to expand
this section to answer questions that are raised by users, and invited
your feedback to tell us where you are stuck, or could do with further
guidance (Contact nmag@soton.ac.uk, or the mailing lists as shown on
http://nmag.soton.ac.uk).




Using VMware player
-------------------

The help function of the VMware Player provides a useful summary of how to use it.

Note that you can switch to full-screen mode when pressing
CTRL+ALT+RETURN, and that you return from full-screen mode by either
pressing CTRL+ALT, or moving the mouse to the top of the screen (to
get the VMPlayer menu).


.. comment:
  If you want to share data with your host, then select ``Shared
  Folders`` from the ``VMware Player`` menu (you may have to do this as
  the Administrator).
  
  If you need more help here, please let the nmag team know, and we'll
  expand the explanation.

  Hans: it appears that sharing folders is restricted to a paid-for
  version (very annoying), so that data transfer has to be done via
  ftp, scp, email, USB sticks, ...

  Hmm.

  Would vmware server be an alternative?


  

Frequently Asked Questions
--------------------------

.. contents::
  :local:


How can I change the keyboard in the Nmag virtual machine?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You should find a flag at the right end of the bar at the bottom of
the screen with a flag (by default, this may be the US flag). If you
right-click on this, you can configure which keyboard layout you would
like to use.

 

Can I also use other VMware products with the Nmag Virtual machine?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yes, as far as we know. For example, if you have the VMware Work
station or VMware Server, then these can run the Nmag virtual machine
as well. (It may, in fact, be easier to exchange data between the host
and the virtual machine with these more powerful products.)


I know Debian Linux -- can I modify this system?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of course. Once you become root, you can use ``aptitude`` and all
other tools to configure your debian system. This is, after all, a
normal installation (even though it is executed within a virtual
machine).













	 



.. _VMware : http://www.vmware.com